This video is brought to you by keeps
[inaudible].
What's up wisecrack Jared here and today,
we're going to talk about clowns and the IP that made them the stuff of now.
Crusty, I have to warn you people's attitudes have changed about cash.
There.
Wasn't the Simpsons that did this to our collective cultural subconscious.
It was Stephen Kings.
Well I'm Pennywise cloud.
Originally published as a novel in 1986 and then later adapted to a two-part
mini series in 1990,
it received a facelift recently in the form of two blockbuster films.
The first film got rave reviews,
racking up a solid 85% on rotten tomatoes and smashing it at the box office.
Did chapter two, repeat the success. We'll let Stephen King answer that.
Now. I didn't like the ending.
Yeah, it was disorienting really bad. So what happened? Wisecrack?
How could chapter one hit it out of the park while chapter two struck out
swinging while we could point to a lot of things we think the central problem
has to do with the way that horror films are structured.
Welcome to this wisecrack edition on it. Chapter two,
what went wrong and spoilers ahead for chapters one and two.
Oh and the book as well. But before we get into it,
I want to give a shout out to this week.
Sponsor keeps you may have noticed that I haven't gotten a chance to get a
haircut in the past couple months. At the end of the day,
I can live without a visit to the barber. It's not that bad of a problem.
However, if I were losing my hair,
I know I would do everything in my power to prevent it.
Prevention is the key to keeping your hair and avoiding hats. Isn't enough,
keeps isn't affordable hair loss treatment program that helps you keep your hair
with FDA approved over the counter and prescription medication keeps can tailor
a prevention plan to your specific needs. You meet with a doctor,
right from the comfort of your own home.
And the medication will be shipped to your front door.
Find out why keeps has more five star reviews than any of its competitors.
And why nearly 100,000 men trust keeps for their hair loss prevention medication
by clicking the link in the description,
or by going to keep stock com slash wisecrack. If you use our link,
you can get 50% off your first order. So stop stressing and keep your hair.
And now back to the show, all right, let's dive into a quick recap of the films.
It chapter one follows a plucky gang of self-described losers.
As they navigate the challenges of growing up in small town, America,
they get bullied fall in love and Oh yeah. Get tormented by this guy.
As it turns out the town of dairy, isn't quite like other towns,
kids are going missing, including Georgie,
the younger brother of our lead loser bill,
the cause one very hungry clown named Pennywise.
Bill tries to convince his friends to face this cackling menace in order to save
his brother.
But the group disbands after a seriously messed up encounter at Pennywise is
crack house of horrors.
We'll be better prepared. No, no.
Next time bill you're insane.
That is until Beverly gets kidnapped, which forces the team back together.
They then descend into the, overcome their fears,
save Beverly and defeat Pennywise. Well for now,
chapter two picks up 27 years later when Pennywise has come back and the gang
has to reunite in order to beat Pennywise for good,
the group has to collect items that were important to them from childhood and
sacrifice them in some suitably, vague native American ritual.
After the team collects their tokens, they meet up to defeat Pennywise,
except that ritual. Yeah, didn't work.
Can we do it? Can we do it? Yeah.
Do we do everybody put the tokens in the thing that's good, right?
We did it right.
Instead the team is forced to confront their childhood traumas again until they
overcome them and arrive at the convenient realization that Pennywise as a
projection of their fear will shape-shift into whatever they think of him. As,
as he triples into a baby clown thing,
the group rips out his heart and crushes it,
thus freeing the town of dairy from the torments of it. Now on paper,
these films seem pretty similar. The group gets together,
overcomes their fears and takes down a demonic clown.
So why does this formula work in the first film, but not the second? Well,
we think it has to do with the way structure and timing work both in horror and
in movies at large, as the master of thrills,
Alfred Hitchcock said there is no terror in the bang only in the anticipation
of it.
And it's precisely this understanding of timing or lack thereof that makes
chapter one. So good. And chapter two so bad.
So let's dive in. According to screenwriting guru, John York,
a properly constructed scene should structurally mirror your archetypical three
act film structure to York. Storytelling is ultimately fractal in nature.
Kind of like a pattern that repeats itself,
regardless of the scale in his book into the woods,
he writes stories as a whole illustrate, complete change acts, show,
major change, and scenes of minor individual moments. It's in the latter.
The single cells of the organism that a writer's effort is concentrated for each
is a unit of change. And just as a movie is usually told in three acts.
So can a scene usually be divided into three main parts? First,
our protagonist wants to do something only to be boarded by another character or
force of antagonism before a choice is made.
And one of those two opposing forces gives way.
Now it's important to note that this tripartite structure,
isn't a hard and fast rule, frankly,
there are as many ways to formulate a scene.
As there are fast and furious movies. That being said,
we found that a good scare can usually be broken down in this way while a bad
one. Usually rejects it to see this in action though,
we need to examine some key scenes from both movies.
Perhaps the most iconic scene of both films is the opening scare for chapter
one. In this iconic moment, we see the three-part structure pretty clearly.
First let's start with the action. Georgie wants his boat back to that end.
He answers Pennywise has seemingly harmless questions about his life and his
friends.
I bet you have a lot of friends, three of my brothers, my best ex,
where is he.
Throughout this exchange? We aren't scared per se, but it's easy to that.
Tension is building. Of course, Georgie is rightly skeptical.
That is until Pennywise insists. They're not strangers.
Meet George Georgie, meet Pennywise.
This launches us into the second phase reaction Pennywise insists on building a
rapport.
And the two of them start actually getting on much to our increased heart rate
and dread. They talk about the circus and popcorn
that is until Pennywise gets hungry.
This is the halfway point of our reaction phase,
where momentum shifts and our stomachs really dropped to the floor.
We then have to watch as Pennywise convinces Georgie to reach into the drain for
his boat. Georgie is going to have to make a choice.
And that's when the first real scare happens.
[Inaudible].
Yeah,
to say the least it's effective and propels us to our third and final component
turning point. The momentum has shifted.
Pennywise has come out on top as a one-armed Georgie whales and tries to escape
the music crescendos. And we are left with one terrifying image.
Almost every successful scare in chapter one follows this three-part structure.
Consider the scene in which Eddie strolls past the Wellhouse naturally.
Eddie wants to get the F out of there while the well house. Well,
the house has its own ideas.
No.
So Eddie tries to leave, and this is our action beat,
but he ends up fumbling his pill bottle while scrambling to pick up his
medicine, though, he's greeted by the force of antagonism. In this case,
a lever, this is our reaction beat, and it sends a running.
The only problem is that he's now running in the backyard of the well house and
Oh yeah, there's a chain link fence back there.
This is our turning point where our protagonist and antagonist are pitted
against each other. And that antagonist, well that's Pennywise.
Now that's scary.
This payoff is all the more satisfying and scary precisely because it was
proceeded by mounting moments of terror. Of course,
just when it seems Eddie's about to go the way of young Georgie,
he finds a hole in the gate and escapes though, undoubtedly scarred for life.
But while chapter one is clearly competent at structuring scares,
chapter two is quite a bit messier. Let's break down the scene.
When up Richie returns to his childhood arcade to collect his token,
while there he has a flashback in which you were called playing video games with
another kid only to have that kid call them out in front of Bowers as gay.
Dude. Are you being weird? I'm not your boyfriend. Woo aye.
Then Bowers, shouts Richie out of the arcade, leaving him to wander the park.
Oh right. And Richie then gets chased by a demonic lumberjack statue.
I think my pants,
if you're wondering why this part wasn't particularly terrifying.
It's not because the Brawny towel dude,
isn't a little frightening it's because the film doesn't build into the scare.
None of the action in the arcade primes us for the scare.
So when our lumberjack comes out swinging, it seems pretty much out of nowhere,
but it's not like this lack of an effective three-part structure is an isolated
event in chapter two, whether it's bill reliving,
his trauma or Eddie going for round two with the leper,
each scene reaches a scare in the turning point stage that has nothing to do
with the antagonist in the action or reaction stages. For example,
let's look at when Ben reminisces about hiding out in a classroom with Beverly
minus a small false scare here. The conflict,
the scene revolves around Ben wanting to tell Beverly his true feelings.
We have the action in which Ben is worried about how they'll get on.
Then the reaction which Beverly says it should be fine.
As long as the two of them can still hang out.
Then decision time is the turning point has been decides to lean in for the kiss
and gets rejected.
He thought it could like someone is fat and gross and disgusting like you.
And that's where the film attempts to get scary out of nowhere.
Beverly decides to go all ghost,
which leads to Ben sharing a locker with Pennywise confusing. Yes. Scary.
No, sure. There might be a three beat structure to this scene,
but these beats don't build to the final scare largely because beats one and two
feel like they were ripped from a teenage romance novel. Instead of these beats,
focusing on a potential scare they're focused on the will.
They won't they aspect of Beverly and Ben's relationship. Of course,
there are other places in chapter two where the film seems to get this right
only to later throw it out the window,
take the scene where Beverly revisits her childhood home after Beverly low-key,
vandalizes her old bedroom to find her token.
She sits down for tea with the apartments, new owner,
one sweaty older woman in pursuit of a sinister seeming,
but unspecified end.
But you know what they say about Derek?
No one who dies here ever really dies.
The conversation starts pleasantly, but quickly becomes uncomfortable.
When the woman brings up death and starts fanning her corpse like chest.
This is the action phase. Beverly sensing something is wrong.
Then tries to excuse herself. The reaction phase here dread is building.
As we see Pennywise in a photo and the old woman shimmying naked in the
backdrop, one has to give Beverly or our naked septuagenarian.
Unsurprisingly it's Beverly the old woman comes out screaming like Baba Yaga.
And Beverly is on the run. Now. Yes,
all of this fits York's formulation of action reaction turning point.
The only problem though, is that this correctly structured scare was buried.
Any more confusing series of scenes.
It was proceeded by a tense flashback of Beverly and her abusive father.
And it was followed up immediately by a strange conversation with Pennywise.
You haven't [inaudible].
Taken together.
This scare was lost in the mix of different conflicts and rising tensions.
So I think it's fair to say that the scene structure of chapter one is one of
the film's strengths while structure and chapter two is one of its weaknesses.
But now let's go back to York's concept of fractal storytelling.
That is this three part structure repeats itself, not just in scenes,
but also the film as a whole. Now of course,
both films do have a three-act structure,
but what makes chapter one so good and chapter two so bad is the spacing of
these scares within their respective acts just as every fright needs an earlier
up in the scene. So two does every scary scene need a setup in the act,
too many frightening scenes in a row.
When you run into a problem with diminishing returns. On the other hand,
if there's too long of a drought between your stairs,
you start to lose the tension and the script unsurprisingly chapter one suffers
from neither of these problems.
While chapter two suffers from both of them to prove this point,
let's compare the first act of chapter one to the first act of chapter two and
chapter one,
the first act runs from the beginning right up until the gang realizes they've
all been terrorized by the same clown. Meanwhile, in chapter two,
act one spans from the opening until Bev tells everyone they're doomed to die.
And Mike proposes his stupid ritual, the ritual of church.
So how many scares were contained in each film's first act in chapter one?
The answer is a healthy eight scares or roughly a scare every eight or so
minutes in chapter two, there are four scares or a scare every 15 minutes.
And some of these scenes, while it's hard to say, if they were actually frights.
I mean, honestly is Pennywise showing up to eat a drowning man,
really a horror scene, or is he just depended to a cliched scene of violence,
small town homophobia, even worse.
Only one of these scares actually happens to our main cast of characters when
monsters emerge from their fortune cookies. And if you're wondering, no,
there's no action reaction buildup to it.
Is that man.
Instead of building to periodic scares,
the first act of chapter two is unusually obsessed with comedic gags.
Okay. I love you mommy. What.
The interpersonal relationships between its characters.
This wouldn't be so bad except that it has the weird effect of further diluting.
What little tension there is in the first act,
this general lack of frites in the first act of chapter two,
however only creates bigger structural problems.
And its second act typically act one is used to establish our characters along
with their flaws and motivations. In chapter one,
we learned that bill was obsessed with finding his missing brother.
It's the only place that, that, that Georgia could have ended up.
While we get to know about the rest of our ensemble cast through their run-ins
with Pennywise. Eddie is haunted by a leper and his fear of germs.
Mike is haunted by the fire that killed his parents.
And Beverly is haunted by her father and her nascent sexuality
By combining character introductions with terrifying moments,
chapter one manages to keep audiences engaged in its first act and masterfully
sets up act two for our characters have to face the forces of antagonism.
Head-on unfortunately for chapter two, though,
the film didn't give us these introductory run-ins with Pennywise until act two.
That means instead of watching our heroes fight back in the second act like they
did in the Wellhouse in chapter one,
we have to rewatch their character introductions worst because chapter two has
to cram these moments all into its second act.
The horror feels formulaic and repetitive because let's be real jump scares.
Aren't great.
When we watch them back to back to back with acts one and two lagging in terms
of plot development,
it's no surprise then that the third activit chapter two also falls flat as
Billy Wilder.
The iconic screenwriter from the golden age of Hollywood said if you have a
problem with the third act,
the real problem is in the first act because chapter two,
didn't give our heroes a proper introduction and goal in the first act and asked
to play some massive catch-up in the second act. As a result.
When we arrive at the third act,
when our characters have to make the choice to stare down our antagonist or left
feeling like not much has happened, the team goes back to dairy.
Each one collects their own token and then they all meet at the warehouse for
the final battle.
Has killed in clown. But.
Without the buildup in the prior acts,
this turning point feels anticlimactic our group.
Hasn't had to overcome any real opposition.
So their decision to face Pennywise doesn't bear the same weight worse because
the ritual doesn't even work in the first place.
We're wondering why they didn't just face off earlier and save us an hour of
time and that face off. Yeah,
we already watched the group beat the lights out of the clown in the first film.
Now you're the one who's afraid. Ultimately.
Chapter two is rife with poorly structured scenes that when combined make for
poorly structured acts that when combined make for very disappointed moviegoers,
but let us know what you guys think in the comments below big thanks to our
patrons for supporting the channel and our podcasts.
Don't forget to subscribe and as always, thanks for watching guys.
Peace
[inaudible].